docs: Design doc for isolated namespaces for different rgw (#12140)
rook/rook: design/ceph/object/store.md

    port: 80
    securePort: 443
    instances: 3

>   # radosNamespaces:

Reviewer: Let's remove this example. We can just focus on the rados namespaces example in the later section of the doc.

If `preservePoolsOnDelete` is set to 'true' the pools used to support the object store will remain when the object store will be deleted. This is a security measure to avoid accidental loss of data. It is set to 'false' by default. If not specified is also deemed as 'false'.

> If user want to use existing pools for metadata and data, the pools must be created before the object store is created. This will be useful if multiple objectstore can share same pools. The detail of pools need to shared in `radosNamespaces` settings in object-store CRD. And for this option to work, `preservePoolsOnDelete` must be set to 'true'. Now the object stores can consume same pool isolated with different namespaces.

Reviewer: What rados namespaces will be created in the pool? Currently we have several metadata pools for an object store. Will rados namespaces be created in place of each of those pools?

Author: There will be one pool IMO, In the same pool Rook creates a namespace for RGW AFAIR. Please refer @cbodley comment https://github.com/rook/rook/issues/10805#issuecomment-1340013429

Reviewer: Please capture the proposal in this design doc, so we don't have to refer back to that issue. I'm not clear now what the proposal is. We need to be clear exactly which pool(s) are created, which CR(s) own them, and which RADOS namespaces are used by an object store.

> 

Reviewer: What about the `.rgw.root` pool? Will that also be created as a rados namespace, or is that still a special pool required by rgw?

Author: `.rgw.root` will be automatically created when first `radosgw-admin` command is executed

Reviewer: All pools need to be created by rook via CRs so that the correct replication or other settings can be applied to the pool. If radosgw-admin creates the pool, it will just use ceph defaults where rook users don't have control.

> If user want to use existing pools for metadata and data, the pools must be created before the object store is created. This will be useful if multiple objectstore can share same pools. The detail of pools need to shared in `radosNamespaces` settings in object-store CRD. And for this option to work, `preservePoolsOnDelete` must be set to 'true'. Now the object stores can consume same pool isolated with different namespaces. User can create via [Pool CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md), this is need to present before the object store is created.

Reviewer: Why do the pools need to be created in advance? I would propose that there is no need for the CephBlockPool CR to be used to create the pools. Those pools are used only for rbd. If the `radosNamespaces` settings are specified in the CephObjectStore CR, then the reconcile of the object store will just create them if they don't exist yet. The first object store created would just create them. Since the controller processes the object CRs serially, there will not be a conflict. If this is the case, then we should always treat these pools as `preservePoolsOnDelete: true` since there is no object store owner for the pools.

    erasureCoded:
      dataChunks: 6
      codingChunks: 2

>   radosNamespaces:

Reviewer 2: I think the design could be simplified by doing something like below... 
```suggestion
  metadataPool:
    useSharedPool:
      name: rgw-meta-pool
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
  dataPool:
    useSharedPool:
      name: rgw-data-pool
    failureDomain: device
    erasureCoded:
      dataChunks: 6
      codingChunks: 2
```

... however, there is still a problem if pool configs are set by multiple object stores. While it is clunky, I don't see a way to resolve this without requiring a CephBlockPool to be created for RGWs before they use the pool. Multiple CephObjectStore resources shouldn't be contending over ownership of the pool definitions.

Reviewer 2: Also, asking users to create pre-requisite pools for their object stores that are going to share pool access doesn't seem like it changes anything from our existing usage patterns for things like the `.nfs` pool.

```
  metadataPool:
    useSharedPool: # if present, no other configs are allowed
      name: rgw-meta-pool
    failureDomain: host # error because not allowed
    replicated:
      size: 3
  dataPool:
    useSharedPool: # ditto
      name: rgw-data-pool
    failureDomain: device # ditto
    erasureCoded:
      dataChunks: 6
      codingChunks: 2
```

Reviewer: I like the idea of specifying the pools under the new radosNamespaces section, with a couple suggestions:
- The shared pool name always needs to be specified, whether the pools are defined in another CR or not.
- Only one object CR is expected to define the pools. If multiple CRs define the same exact pools, then there is no problem. If the pool definitions conflict, the admission controller could check, although it's not always enabled. But honestly this conflict would be an annoying design issue.

The spec of the CR that owns the pools:
```yaml
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPool:
      sharedPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
      failureDomain: host
      replicated:
        size: 3
    dataPool:
      sharedPoolName: rgw-data-pool
      failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
```

Spec of the other CRs:
```yaml
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPool:
      sharedPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPool:
      sharedPoolName: rgw-data-pool
```

> Also, asking users to create pre-requisite pools for their object stores that are going to share pool access doesn't seem like it changes anything from our existing usage patterns for things like the .nfs pool.

True, we did something special for .nfs with the CephBlockPool CR, so if we were to do something special for the RGW pools with CephBlockPool, maybe it wouldn't be so bad as I was thinking. There are just a couple behaviors specific to RGW pools, such as setting a lower PG count for metadata pools and setting the application to "rgw" instead of "rbd". So perhaps it would then look like this... I'd like to avoid exposing the `application` in the pool spec, not sure if the default `rbd` application would be an issue from the CephBlockPool.

Metadata CephBlockPool:
```yaml
  metadata:
    name: rgw-meta-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
```

Data CephBlockPool:
```yaml
  metadata:
    name: rgw-data-pool
  spec:
      failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
    application: rgw
```

CephObjectStore CR:
```yaml
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPoolName: rgw-data-pool
```

>     # If true, create RADOS namespaces for this object store.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # If true, create RADOS namespaces for this object store.
```
the namespace for RADOS will created automatically or user needs to create this?

Author: There is no namespace per se, this is more like annotations in the pool, so that RGW data will be stored in that location

    # Default is false, preserve the current behavior for backward compatibility.

>     create: true

Reviewer 2: I don't think `create` is a great value for this. Can we not use the presence of `poolName` below to indicate that the option is enabled?

>     poolName: my-pool-collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    poolName: rgw-common-pool
```

Reviewer: How would they create this pool? With a CephBlockPool CR? IIRC any pools created with that CR will be marked as the `rbd` application, but would the pool need to set the `rgw` application instead?

Author: IMO it is better to leave to users about creating the pools, It may add up complexity about which store is owner and when to delete and all.

>     poolName: my-pool-collection

Reviewer 2: Is there a case where a user might want to use different pools for metadata and data?

Author: In the example from my understanding only one pool `collection` mentioned and used for both data and metadata pools. I guess we can have seperate pool  for data and metadata as well. @cbodley any ideas?

>     poolName: my-pool-collection

Reviewer 2: How will configs for this pool be managed?

  preservePoolsOnDelete: true
```

#### Pools shared by multiple CephObjectStore

If user want to use existing pools for metadata and data, the pools must be created before the object store is created. This will be useful if multiple objectstore can share same pools. The detail of pools need to shared in `radosNamespaces` settings in object-store CRD. Now the object stores can consume same pool isolated with different namespaces. User can create via [Pool CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md), this is need to present before the object store is created.

```yaml

>   radosNamespaces:

Reviewer 2: Please add the spec headers above this so that we have a specific design plan for where in the spec this config lives. Also, please include the current pool config options as a reference (with the yaml commented out) so we see better at a glance how the new configs relates to old ones.

    metadataPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPoolName: rgw-data-pool
```

To create the pools that will be shared by multiple object stores, create the following CephBlockPool CRs:

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-meta-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
---
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
 metadata:
    name: rgw-data-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
    application: rgw
```

The `.rgw.root` pool must be defined before the object store is created. This pool is used for storing the root info for all object stores.

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-root
  spec:
    name: .rgw.root
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
```

The pools for this configuration will be created as below:

```bash
# ceph osd pool ls
.rgw.root
rgw-meta-pool
rgw-data-pool
```

And the pool configuration in zone is as below:

> ```json

Reviewer 2: This is really helpful, thank you!

Please make a note that the syntax here is `<pool-name>:<namespace>`. This will make it more clear for other readers that when namespacing is used, there are actually many, many namespaces created, especially in the metadata pool.

I would also suggest linking the RGW data layout doc, especially the compendium section in the design here as a reference: https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/radosgw/layout/#appendix-compendium

> # radosgw-admin zone get --rgw-zone=my-store

Reviewer: How will rook configure these pool and namespace settings for the object store? Can Rook call the admin ops when creating the object store to set these? Please add this answer to the design doc so when someone picks this up, they can see how to proceed.

Author: Currently we don't have apis for zone/zonegroup. So we need to use `radosgw-admin` commands

Reviewer: Ok, can you add example commands to this design doc?

{
    "id": "2220eb5f-2751-4a51-9c7d-da4ce1b0e4e1",
    "name": "my-store",

>     "domain_root": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.root",
>     "control_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.control",
>     "gc_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.gc",
>     "lc_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.lc",
>     "log_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store",
>     "intent_log_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.intent",
>     "usage_log_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.usage",
>     "roles_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.roles",
>     "reshard_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.reshard",
>     "user_keys_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.users.keys",
>     "user_email_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.users.email",
>     "user_swift_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.users.swift",
>     "user_uid_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.users.uid",
>     "otp_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.otp",

Reviewer 2: It seems to me that it is probably best to try to keep good 1:1 matching between pools and namespaces where possible. I notice that in this design, some of the info that used to be codified by different pool names is lost. When there are separate pools used for separate "functions", that is easy to read. For example, there used to be a `log` pool, but `log` is no longer mentioned here with your proposed namespace layout.

I think that it would be best to make sure all of the information that was previously codified is retained. This will make it easier to understand comparisons between namespaced and non-namespaced object stores. I also think that it will more easily allow us to support more types of meta pools in the future if we need to expand the design (i.e., if we need to support shared control/log/index/non-ec/otp pools in the future).

For example, this is what the `default` zone/objectstore looks like from some Ceph docs AFAICT:
```
radosgw-admin zone get
{
    "id": "adacbe1b-02b4-41b8-b11d-0d505b442ed4",
    "name": "default",
    "domain_root": "default.rgw.meta:root",
    "control_pool": "default.rgw.control",
    "gc_pool": "default.rgw.log:gc",
    "lc_pool": "default.rgw.log:lc",
    "log_pool": "default.rgw.log",
    "intent_log_pool": "default.rgw.log:intent",
    "usage_log_pool": "default.rgw.log:usage",
    "roles_pool": "default.rgw.meta:roles",
    "reshard_pool": "default.rgw.log:reshard",
    "user_keys_pool": "default.rgw.meta:users.keys",
    "user_email_pool": "default.rgw.meta:users.email",
    "user_swift_pool": "default.rgw.meta:users.swift",
    "user_uid_pool": "default.rgw.meta:users.uid",
    "otp_pool": "default.rgw.otp",
    "system_key": {
        "access_key": "",
        "secret_key": ""
    },
    "placement_pools": [
        {
            "key": "default-placement",
            "val": {
                "index_pool": "default.rgw.buckets.index",
                "storage_classes": {
                    "STANDARD": {
                        "data_pool": "default.rgw.buckets.data"
                    }
                },
                "data_extra_pool": "default.rgw.buckets.non-ec",
                "index_type": 0
            }
        }
    ],
    "realm_id": "",
    "notif_pool": "default.rgw.log:notif"
}
```
I note that the pool/namespace format is `<zone>.rgw.<function>:<subfunction>`.

I think we should make sure we preserve all this info by rearranging it to this format when namespaced: `<shared-pool>:<zone>.<function>.<subfunction>`
```suggestion
    "domain_root": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.root",
    "control_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.control",
    "gc_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.log.gc",
    "lc_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.log.lc",
    "log_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.log",
    "intent_log_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.log.intent",
    "usage_log_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.log.usage",
    "roles_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.roles",
    "reshard_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.log.reshard",
    "user_keys_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.keys",
    "user_email_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.email",
    "user_swift_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.swift",
    "user_uid_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.uid",
    "otp_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.otp",
```

I guess this would also mean changing some below content as well, like `rgw-meta-pool:my-store.buckets.index`, `rgw-data-pool:my-store.buckets.data`, `rgw-meta-pool:my-store.buckets.non-ec`, and `rgw-meta-pool:my-store.log.notif`.

This is assuming that index and non-ec are supposed to use configs for the meta pool.

    "system_key": {
        "access_key": "",
        "secret_key": ""
    },
    "placement_pools": [
        {
            "key": "default-placement",
            "val": {

>                 "index_pool": "rgw-data-pool:my-store.buckets.index",

Reviewer 2: Index goes with data and not metadata?

Rook currently treats the index as a meta pool: https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/719a8cdb50712115eece923db3bbe724ffbe7c8d/pkg/operator/ceph/object/objectstore.go#L59-L67

Is this a bug in Rook's current implementation? Is this something that some users might want more control over? Might some users want this to be a data pool?

Author: @BlaineEXE From the [docs](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_ceph_storage/4/html/object_gateway_for_production_guide/assembly-developing-storage-strategies-rgw-prod#creating-service-pools-rgw-prod), data pools are `rgw.buckets.data` and `rgw.buckets.non-ec`. The `rgw.buckets.non-ec` store objects related to multipart upload(not the head object) if the data pool is configured to `ec`

Author: Thats bug in Rook atm

Reviewer: Where does that doc indicate the `buckets.index` pool is a data pool? An index should generally be replicated for higher performance, and not erasure-coded. Only the data pools should be erasure-coded. So I believe this should be in the `rgw-metadata-pool`.
```suggestion
                "index_pool": "rgw-metadata-pool:my-store.buckets.index",
```

Reviewer 2: @cbodley please advise

Reviewer 4: > An index should generally be replicated for higher performance, and not erasure-coded. Only the data pools should be erasure-coded. So I believe this should be in the rgw-metadata-pool.

agree with @travisn here. the bucket index uses omap exclusively so can't run on an erasure-coded pool

is rook's distinction between 'metadata' and 'data' pools strictly about erasure-coding, or are there other considerations too?

Author: @travisn : `bucket.index` is not a data pool, I totally agree with that. I was only referring to  the `rgw.buckets.non-ec` is datapool but cannot be configured to EC from the doc

Reviewer: > is rook's distinction between 'metadata' and 'data' pools strictly about erasure-coding, or are there other considerations too?

Rook's distinction was also to create the metadata pools with lower PG count.

Reviewer 2: @cbodley we have been specfically discussing `bucket.index`, but there was another pool in question: `rgw.buckets.non-ec`. By the "non-ec" name, I assume that the same thing holds true here. Is that a safe assumption?

Reviewer 4: the non-ec pool also relies on omap to track the parts of multipart uploads, so can't be erasure-coded. i don't think we store object data in it, so it's usage is similar to the index pool

                "storage_classes": {
                    "STANDARD": {
                        "data_pool": "rgw-data-pool:my-store.buckets.data"
                    }
                },

>                 "data_extra_pool": "rgw-data-pool:my-store.buckets.non-ec",

Reviewer 2: Non-ec goes with data and not metadata?

Rook currently treats the index as a meta pool: https://github.com/rook/rook/blob/719a8cdb50712115eece923db3bbe724ffbe7c8d/pkg/operator/ceph/object/objectstore.go#L59-L67

Is this a bug in Rook's current implementation? Is this something that some users might want more control over? Might some users want this to be a data pool?

                "index_type": 0,
                "inline_data": "true"
            }
        }
    ],
    "realm_id": "65a7bf34-42d3-4344-ac40-035e160d7f9e",

>     "notif_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.notif"

Reviewer 2: @yuvalif will changing this affect anything related to your notifications work?

Reviewer 5: the default pool name for notifications is handcoded (similarly t otoher pools), but you can set it with the zone parameters. so, if it is set, there should be no issue

Reviewer 2: Thanks, Yuval. Sounds like it might affect that work then, so we should note that in the design.

Reviewer: Does this line already define the `notif` rados namespace, or what else is needed to document?

}
```

#### For mulisite use case

> If there is a `zone` section in object-store configuration, then the pool creation will performed by the [CephObjectZone CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-zone-crd.md). The `CephObjectStore` CRD will include below section to specify the zone name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there is a `zone` section in object-store configuration, then the pool creation will configured by the [CephObjectZone CR](/Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-zone-crd.md). The `CephObjectStore` CR will include below section to specify the zone name.
```

```yaml
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPoolName: rgw-data-pool
```

To create the pools that will be shared by multiple object stores, create the following CephBlockPool CRs:

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-meta-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
---
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
 metadata:
    name: rgw-data-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
    application: rgw
```

The `.rgw.root` pool must be defined before the object store is created. This pool is used for storing the root info for all object stores.

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-root
  spec:
    name: .rgw.root
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
```

The pools for this configuration will be created as below:

```bash
# ceph osd pool ls

> .rgw.root

Reviewer: This list of pools is different from the pools that are created above by the CephBlockPools. Above, only three pools are created: `.rgw.root`, `rgw-meta-pool`, and `rgw-data-pool`. However, this list contains seven pools. If there are seven pools, then we need seven CephBlockPool CRs. 

I am hoping we can avoid creating seven pools and just use three pools. This will keep the pools so much simpler if we can just use RADOS namespaces inside the same pools. Does RGW require seven pools, or can we have three pools if we use the RADOS namespaces?

Reviewer: Please answer [this thread](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12140#discussion_r1378092677) where I asked about this same topic of pool consolidation. I still understand from [this example](https://github.com/rook/rook/issues/10805#issuecomment-1340013429) that it's possible to use a single metadata pool.

    "reshard_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.log.reshard",
    "user_keys_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.keys",
    "user_email_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.email",
    "user_swift_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.swift",
    "user_uid_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.uid",
    "otp_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.otp",
    "system_key": {
        "access_key": "",
        "secret_key": ""
    },
    "placement_pools": [
        {
            "key": "default-placement",
            "val": {
                "index_pool": "rgw-metadata-pool:my-store.buckets.index",
                "storage_classes": {
                    "STANDARD": {
                        "data_pool": "rgw-data-pool:my-store.buckets.data"
                    }
                },
                "data_extra_pool": "rgw-data-pool:my-store.buckets.non-ec", #only pool is not erasure coded, otherwise use different pool
                "index_type": 0,
                "inline_data": "true"
            }
        }
    ],
    "realm_id": "65a7bf34-42d3-4344-ac40-035e160d7f9e",
    "notif_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.notif"
}
```

> Manual steps involved to add this feature assuming zone and pool are already created:

Reviewer: We are saying the operator will implement these steps so the user doesn't have to manually run them, right? The suggestion in a previous comment about manual steps was only for prototyping. Now let's write the design doc according to the plan to implement in the operator.

```bash

# radosgw-admin zone get --rgw-zone=my-store > zone.json

# modify the zone.json to add the pools as above

# radosgw-admin zone set --rgw-zone=my-store --infile=zone.json

# radosgw-admin period update --commit
```

> After deleting the object store the data in the rados namespace can deleted by following commands:

Reviewer: The operator would automate these during uninstall, right? Please review [this comment](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12140#issuecomment-1828777007) for the suggested setting related to  uninstall.

  preservePoolsOnDelete: true
```

#### Pools shared by multiple CephObjectStore

> If user want to use existing pools for metadata and data, the pools must be created before the object store is created. This will be useful if multiple objectstore can share same pools. The detail of pools need to shared in `radosNamespaces` settings in object-store CRD. And for this option to work, `preservePoolsOnDelete` must be set to 'true'. Now the object stores can consume same pool isolated with different namespaces. User can create via [Pool CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md), this is need to present before the object store is created.

Reviewer 2: I think that we should either
1. enforce `preservePoolsOnDelete: true` if namespaces are used, OR
2. ignore the value of `preservePoolsOnDelete` because we know that the pools need preserved, being defined by CephBlockPool CRs.

This is also a good thing to note in the design because it exposes the need for us to have a similar setting for namespaces.

I would offer that we might want to create a new configurable `preserveDataOnDelete` which preserves pools if namespacing isn't used, or preserves the RADOS namespace if namespacing is used. We can then deprecate (but keep around for legacy users) the `preservePoolsOnDelete` config.

@travisn thoughts?

Reviewer: Yes, that sounds good to have `preserveDataOnDelete` and deprecate the other setting. If the object store is using RADOS namespaces, we should anyway never delete the pools since they would be owned by the CephBlockPool CRs.

Reviewer 2: @thotz reminder that this has not been addressed yet.

Author: Yaa understand the usecase, but I was not able to find a way to list or delete namespaces in Ceph.

Reviewer 2: I have used the `rados` tool to work with RBD namespaces

Author: @BlaineEXE there is option `-N` to give namespace, but nothing to list the namespace as such. There is this wiki page bit old https://tracker.ceph.com/projects/ceph/wiki/Rados_namespaces. Man page does not give much options either https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/man/8/rados/

Author: Can please the share docs or commands, and see whether it works for RGW as well like in RBD

```yaml
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPoolName: rgw-data-pool
  preservePoolsOnDelete: true
```

To create the pools that will be shared by multiple object stores, create the following CephBlockPool CRs:

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-meta-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
---
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
 metadata:
    name: rgw-data-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
    application: rgw
```

The `.rgw.root` pool must be defined before the object store is created. This pool is used for storing the root info for all object stores.

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-root
  spec:
    name: .rgw.root
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
```

> The pools for this configuration will be created as below:

Reviewer: Did you mean to list the namespaces?
```suggestion
The RADOS namespaces for this configuration will be created as below:
```

Author: Nope I was trying to list pools how it will get created with `radosnamespaces`

```bash
# ceph osd pool ls
.rgw.root

> rgw-meta-pool.rgw.control:my-store

Reviewer: This RADOS namespace will be inside the pool `rgw-meta-pool`, right? So is this Or is this the `my-store` RADOS namespace inside the pool `rgw-meta-pool.rgw.control`? But I thought there was only one metadata pool created.

Author: radosnamespace will be the store/zone name. We create pools with pool config. I got example from https://github.com/rook/rook/issues/10805#issuecomment-1340013429

Reviewer: From that comment I had understood that there could be one meta pool, and then several RADOS namespaces created inside that single pool. I thought this is why your design doc only created two pools above: `rgw-meta-pool` and `rgw-data-pool` (let's ignore `.rgw.root` right now). Then all the RADOS namespaces for the metadata can be created inside the single metadata pool. There is no need for more than these two pools anymore as I understand it. The purpose of the RADOS namespace is so we can avoid creating more pools, and the object stores can also share the same pools, with different RADOS namespaces.

For example, let's say we want to create two object stores that share the same pools, where the object stores are named "one" and "two". This means we create two pools, with their RADOS namespaces in the sub-bullets: 
- `rgw-meta-pool` 
- `rgw-data-pool`

In that other link, this would translate to the rgw config for the first object store (This list is likely *not* complete, but it's just following the example in the other link):
```
"user_keys_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:one.users.keys",
"user_email_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:one.users.email",
"user_swift_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:one.users.swift",
"user_uid_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:one.users.uid",
```
And the same pools with different RADOS namespaces for the second object store:
```
"user_keys_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:two.users.keys",
"user_email_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:two.users.email",
"user_swift_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:two.users.swift",
"user_uid_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:two.users.uid",
```
Therefore, multiple RADOS namespaces would be created for each object store in those same two pools.

We can discuss in our next meeting to clarify.

Reviewer 2: I am also confused. The output here says that the command is `ceph osd pool ls`, which lists pools. There are many more pools in this output than the 3 pools defined above. What's going on here? 

Maybe it would be more helpful to list out pools as a bulleted list, with namespaces and objects as sub-components instead of this output that I and many others probably don't understand natively.

rgw-meta-pool.rgw.meta:my-store
rgw-meta-pool.rgw.log:my-store
rgw-meta-pool.rgw.otp:my-store
rgw-data-pool.rgw.buckets.data:my-store
rgw-data-pool.rgw.buckets.index:my-store
```

#### For mulisite use case

> If there is a `zone` section in object-store configuration, then the pool creation will performed by the [CephObjectZone CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-zone-crd.md). The `CephObjectStore` CRD will include below section to specify the zone name.

Reviewer: Did you mean the namespace creation?
```suggestion
If there is a `zone` section in object-store configuration, then the RADOS namespace creation will performed by the [CephObjectZone CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-zone-crd.md). The `CephObjectStore` CRD will include below section to specify the zone name.
```

Author: Sorry I don't understand this part. This is the normal case, if zone is specified in the CephObjectStore CRD then pool creation(without radosnamespaces) will handle by CephObjectZone CRD

```yaml
spec:
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPoolName: rgw-data-pool
    preserveRadosNamespaceDataOnDelete: true
```

To create the pools that will be shared by multiple object stores, create the following CephBlockPool CRs:

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-meta-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
---
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
 metadata:
    name: rgw-data-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
    application: rgw
---
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
 metadata:
    name: .rgw.root
  spec:
    name: .rgw.root
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
```

> Also `.rgw.root` pool must be defined before the object store is created. This pool is used for storing the root info for all object stores.

Reviewer: You can remove lines 130-145 since this pool was combined above.

  preservePoolsOnDelete: true
```

#### Pools shared by multiple CephObjectStore

If user want to use existing pools for metadata and data, the pools must be created before the object store is created. This will be useful if multiple objectstore can share same pools. The detail of pools need to shared in `radosNamespaces` settings in object-store CRD. And for this option to work, `preservePoolsOnDelete` must be set to 'true'. Now the object stores can consume same pool isolated with different namespaces. User can create via [Pool CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md), this is need to present before the object store is created.

```yaml
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPoolName: rgw-data-pool
  preservePoolsOnDelete: true
```

And the pool CRD will look like this:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: > Could you also add a section that shows what rgw configuration will be created for the rados namespaces and list which rados namespaces exactly will be created for each object store? This will help clarify [my question](https://github.com/rook/rook/pull/12140#discussion_r1179481908) about the `.rgw.root` pool which I'm still not clear about. If `.rgw.root` cannot be in a rados namespace, then we need to define its pool CR as well.

What about the `.rgw.root` pool?

Author: @travisn @BlaineEXE : The (.rgw.root)[https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/radosgw/layout/#appendix-compendium] is common pool like `.mgr` and will shared by all the rgw servers in the cluster, so radosnamespace is not applicable for this pool IMO. If not specified it will be created with replica 1 settings. By looking through the code, for usual object stores, this will create metadata pool settings of the first object store. If the multisite settings are enabled for the first object store in the cluster then this will be created with replica setting 1, since Rook executes rados-admin commands for the realm, zonegroup which internally creates this pool.  

@cboldey : Do you recommend to create .rgw.root separately with certain configuration for Rook workloads?

Reviewer: This is why Rook currently creates the .rgw.root pool with the settings in the object store CR, to ensure the expected replication and other settings. So we will need to have a CR for this pool as well

Author: @travisn I agree that it is better to include replication settings for the special pool `.rgw.root`, should set a default configuration for that pool rather than relying on the metadata pool setting for the first objectstore / first objectzone?

Reviewer: We don't want to use a default configuration for any pool, we need to define the pool settings in a CR. So for this scenario it seems we should expect a CephBlockPool to be created for the `.rgw.root` pool, which would define its replication.

Author: @travisn : What about the `.mgr` pool ??

Reviewer 2: I think I am confused about whether the `.rgw.root` pool **cannot** be namespaced or whether it is your opinion -- that is what IMO (**I**n **M**y **O**pinion) means -- that it **should not** be namespaced. Could you clarify?

It seems to me that it might be possible to put the data that would go into `.rgw.root` into the metadata pool to save on the number of CRUSH rules, but I'm not certain.

apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-meta-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
---
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
 metadata:
    name: rgw-data-pool
  spec:
      failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
    application: rgw
```

#### For mulisite use case

> If there is a `zone` section in object-store configuration, then the pool creation will performed by the [CephObjectZone CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-zone-crd.md). The `CephObjectStore` CRD will include below section to specify the zone name.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand. Does this mean zones will always have different pools? Can we allow zones to use namespaces as well?

Author: Yes, for zones pool config is part of CephObjectZone CRD and created along with it, see https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.12/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-zone-crd/ for details.
This option is applicable for normal object store in which pool creation happens with CephObjectStore CRD

Reviewer: I'm not clear either. So RGW multisite cannot use rados namespaces in the pools?

Author: The option can be applicable to normal object stores while the pool is configured within in objectstore CRD. The multisite pool settings are configured with Zone settings. The feature more inclined with normal objectstore, we can support it for multisite. What I meant was for multisite multiple object stores already sharing the pools created by the zone.

If user want to use existing pools for metadata and data, the pools must be created before the object store is created. This will be useful if multiple objectstore can share same pools. The detail of pools need to shared in `radosNamespaces` settings in object-store CRD. And for this option to work, `preservePoolsOnDelete` must be set to 'true'. Now the object stores can consume same pool isolated with different namespaces. User can create via [Pool CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md), this is need to present before the object store is created.

```yaml
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPoolName: rgw-data-pool
  preservePoolsOnDelete: true
```

And the pool CRD will look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-meta-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
---
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
 metadata:
    name: rgw-data-pool
  spec:
      failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
    application: rgw
```

> Also if `.rgw` pool is not present in the cluster, it need to defined before the object store is created. This pool is used for storing the root of the object store. The pool CRD will look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `.rgw.root` pool must be defined before the object store is created. This pool is used for storing the root info for all object stores. 
```

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:

>     name: .rgw

Reviewer: The real name of the pool is in the `spec.name` since it cannot include a `.` here.
```suggestion
    name: rgw-root
```

  spec:

>     failureDomain: host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    name: .rgw.root
    failureDomain: host
```

    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
```

> 

Reviewer: As discussed, please also add a section on which RADOS namespaces will be created for each object store.

#### For mulisite use case

If there is a `zone` section in object-store configuration, then the pool creation will performed by the [CephObjectZone CRD](/Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-zone-crd.md). The `CephObjectStore` CRD will include below section to specify the zone name.

```yaml
spec:
  zone:
    name: zone1
```

> But if user intend to use same pools for different zones in the same ceph cluster then user can consume same feature by defining `radosNamespaces` in `CephObjectZone` CRD. The `CephObjectZone` CRD will include below section to specify the zone name.

Reviewer: This looks like the same example as above on line 83-86. What is different?

```yaml
spec:
  radosNamespaces:
    metadataPoolName: rgw-meta-pool
    dataPoolName: rgw-data-pool
    preserveRadosNamespaceDataOnDelete: true
```

To create the pools that will be shared by multiple object stores, create the following CephBlockPool CRs:

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
metadata:
    name: rgw-meta-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
    parameters:
      pg_num: 8
    application: rgw
---
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephBlockPool
 metadata:
    name: rgw-data-pool
  spec:
    failureDomain: osd
      erasureCoded:
        dataChunks: 6
        codingChunks: 2
    application: rgw
```

> The `.rgw.root` pool must be defined before the object store is created. This pool is used for storing the root info for all object stores.

Reviewer: How about defining this .rgw.root pool at the same (in the same yaml example) as the two pools above?

    "user_email_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.email",
    "user_swift_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.swift",
    "user_uid_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.meta.users.uid",
    "otp_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.otp",
    "system_key": {
        "access_key": "",
        "secret_key": ""
    },
    "placement_pools": [
        {
            "key": "default-placement",
            "val": {
                "index_pool": "rgw-metadata-pool:my-store.buckets.index",
                "storage_classes": {
                    "STANDARD": {
                        "data_pool": "rgw-data-pool:my-store.buckets.data"
                    }
                },
                "data_extra_pool": "rgw-data-pool:my-store.buckets.non-ec", #only pool is not erasure coded, otherwise use different pool
                "index_type": 0,
                "inline_data": "true"
            }
        }
    ],
    "realm_id": "65a7bf34-42d3-4344-ac40-035e160d7f9e",
    "notif_pool": "rgw-meta-pool:my-store.notif"
}
```

The following steps need to implement internally in Rook Operator to add this feature assuming zone and pool are already created:

```bash

> # radosgw-admin zone get --rgw-zone=my-store > zone.json

Reviewer: Is there any admin api for these commands? Or radsgw-admin commands are needed?

Author: Nope we need `radosgw-admin` commands for zone apis
